While Wolfgang was young, his family made several European journeys in which
he and Nannerl performed as child prodigies. These began with an exhibition
in 1762 at the court of Prince-elector Maximilian III (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximilian_III_Joseph,_Elector_of_Bavaria) of Bavaria
in Munich, and at the Imperial Courts in Vienna and Prague. A
long concert tour followed, spanning three and a half years, taking the
family to the courts of Munich, Mannheim, Paris, London, Dover, The Hague,
Amsterdam, Utrecht, Mechelen and again to Paris, and back home via Zurich
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z%C3%BCrich), Donaueschingen, and Munich. During this trip, Wolfgang met many musicians and
acquainted himself with the works of other composers. A particularly significant influence
was Johann Christian Bach, whom he visited in London in 1764 and
1765. When he was eight years old, Mozart wrote his first symphony,
most of which was probably transcribed by his father. The family trips
were often challenging, and travel conditions were primitive. They had to wait
for invitations and reimbursement from the nobility, and they endured long, near-fatal
illnesses far from home: first Leopold (London, summer 1764), then both children
(The Hague, autumn 1765). The family again went to Vienna in late
1767 and remained there until December 1768. After one year in Salzburg,
Leopold and Wolfgang set off for Italy, leaving Anna Maria and Nannerl at
home. This tour lasted from December 1769 to March 1771. As with
earlier journeys, Leopold wanted to display his son's abilities as a performer
and a rapidly maturing composer. Wolfgang met Josef Mysliveček and Giovanni Battista
Martini in Bologna and was accepted as a member of the famous
Accademia Filarmonica. In Rome, he heard Gregorio Allegri's Miserere twice in performance,
in the Sistine Chapel, and wrote it out from memory, thus producing
the first unauthorized copy of this closely guarded property of the Vatican.
In Milan, Mozart wrote the opera Mitridate, re di Ponto (1770), which
was performed with success. This led to further opera commissions. He returned
with his father twice to Milan (August–December 1771; October 1772 – March 1773)
for the composition and premieres of Ascanio in Alba (1771) and Lucio
Silla (1772). Leopold hoped these visits would result in a professional appointment
for his son, and indeed ruling Archduke Ferdinand contemplated hiring Mozart, but
owing to his mother Empress Maria Theresa's reluctance to employ "useless people",
the matter was dropped and Leopold's hopes were never realized. Toward the
end of the journey, Mozart wrote the solo motet Exsultate, jubilate, K.
165. After finally returning with his father from Italy on 13 March
1773, Mozart was employed as a court musician by the ruler of
Salzburg, Prince-Archbishop Hieronymus Colloredo. The composer had many friends and admirers in
Salzburg and had the opportunity to work in many genres, including symphonies,
sonatas, string quartets, masses, serenades, and a few minor operas. Between April
and December 1775, Mozart developed an enthusiasm for violin concertos, producing a
series of five (the only ones he ever wrote), which steadily increased
in their musical sophistication. The last three—K. 216, K. 218, K. 219—are
now staples of the repertoire. In 1776, he turned his efforts to
piano concertos, culminating in the E♭ concerto K. 271 of early 1777,
considered by critics to be a breakthrough work. Despite these artistic successes,
Mozart grew increasingly discontented with Salzburg and redoubled his efforts to find
a position elsewhere. One reason was his low salary, 150 florins a
year; Mozart longed to compose operas, and Salzburg provided only rare occasions
for these. The situation worsened in 1775 when the court theatre was
closed, especially since the other theatre in Salzburg was primarily reserved for
visiting troupes. Two long expeditions in search of work interrupted this long
Salzburg stay. Mozart and his father visited Vienna from 14 July to
26 September 1773, and Munich from 6 December 1774 to March 1775.
Neither visit was successful, though the Munich journey resulted in a popular
success with the premiere of Mozart's opera La finta giardiniera. In August
1777, Mozart resigned his position at Salzburg and on 23 September ventured
out once more in search of employment, with visits to Augsburg, Mannheim,
Paris, and Munich. Mozart became acquainted with members of the famous orchestra
in Mannheim, the best in Europe at the time. He also fell
in love with Aloysia Weber, one of four daughters of a musical family.
There were prospects of employment in Mannheim, but they came to nothing,
and Mozart left for Paris on 14 March 1778 to continue his
search. One of his letters from Paris hints at a possible post
as an organist at Versailles, but Mozart was not interested in such
an appointment. He fell into debt and took to pawning valuables. The
nadir of the visit occurred when Mozart's mother was taken ill and
died on 3 July 1778. There had been delays in calling a
doctor—probably, according to Halliwell, because of a lack of funds. Mozart
stayed with Melchior Grimm, who, as a personal secretary of the Duke
d'Orléans, lived in his mansion. While Mozart was in Paris, his father
was pursuing opportunities of employment for him in Salzburg. With the support
of the local nobility, Mozart was offered a post as court organist
and concertmaster. The annual salary was 450 florins, but he was reluctant
to accept. By that time, relations between Grimm and Mozart had cooled,
and Mozart moved out. After leaving Paris in September 1778 for Strasbourg,
he lingered in Mannheim and Munich, still hoping to obtain an appointment
outside Salzburg. In Munich, he again encountered Aloysia, now a very successful
singer, but she was no longer interested in him. Mozart finally returned
to Salzburg on 15 January 1779 and took up his new appointment,
but his discontent with Salzburg remained undiminished. Among the better-known works which
Mozart wrote on the Paris journey are the A minor piano sonata,
K. 310/300d and the "Paris" Symphony (No. 31), which were performed in
Paris on 12 and 18 June 1778. In January 1781, Mozart's opera Idomeneo
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idomeneo) premiered with "considerable success" in Munich. The following March, Mozart was
summoned to Vienna, where his employer, Archbishop Colloredo, was attending the celebrations
for the accession of Joseph II (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_II,_Holy_Roman_Emperor) to the Austrian throne.